---
title: "Reasons to Go to Grad School"
date: 2019-01-13T08:57:15-08:00
draft: true
---

Last December, I defended my PhD. At the time, I'd been in grad school for
four and a half years, and I'd been working with my research group for another
year on top of that. Because I went to undergrad at the University of
Michigan as well, I'd been living in Ann Arbor for nearly nine years. Why did
I do this?

Prior to my senior year of undergrad, I cold-emailed [Zakir Durumeric][zakir]
about the possibility of doing research. At the time, Zakir was a second-year
graduate student working with [Alex Halderman][jhalderm]. I'd met him before,
and I had already taken the computer security course that he was a teaching
assitant for. I was convinced I wasn't smart enough to work with
Halderman's research group, a friend of mine told me to stop doubting myself
and send the email. This was arguably single most important piece of advice I
received in all of undergrad. I would not have PhD or a [company][censys] if
I did not send that email.

Why did I want to go to grad school? It was a combination of reasons, some
good, some bad. I knew I didn't want to spend a career building CRUD apps, I
was going to be barely 21 years old when I graduated undergrad and I didn't
want to be an adult (or have any idea what life was like outside of school),
and I thought the [Mining Your Ps and Qs][psqs] paper was awesome. At the
time, I also didn't want to move to the west coast.

The best reason to get a PhD is because you want to be research faculty.
There is no way to have a tenure-track faculty position without getting a
PhD. Some people will tell you that the market for faculty positions is a
random dice roll, since there are so few positions relative to candidates.
This is not true in computer science, especially not in security and
cryptography. If the market was random, you would not be able to identify
every year who on the market was going to get job offers. The random part of
the market is figuring out _where_ that job will be (especially among the top
fifteen or so schools), so don't expect to be able to get a faculty position
in a city that you actually want to live in. The market is incredibly
competitive. Imagine there's 100 candidates. Of these, only five candidates
are qualified, and any given school will think that only three of the
candidates out of the five are a match. It is easy to identify who is at the
top of the market. It is hard to actually be at the top of the market.

Not all PhD students come in to the program and want to be faculty. Some are
trying to determine if they actually want to be faculty. Others know they
want to work on a specific problem that can only be accomplished in academia.
This is also a great reason to get a PhD. In my experience, not many people
fit this description. Plenty of people have some research field they're
interested in, but very few know exactly the problem they want to work on.
Keep in mind it is possible to work on research or in research-adjacent
fields without getting a PhD. For example, many people working on applied
cryptography or cryptography engineering do not have a PhD and are not
academics.

For better or for worse, a PhD is also effectively a union card that allows
you to be teaching faculty at a university. If you have no interest in
research, but want a full-time non-adjunct teaching position, you need a PhD.
If you know that a teaching position is your goal, try to do research about
effective teaching. Take opportunities to teach while in grad school,
especially opportunities to lecture rather than be a teaching assistant.

There's another class of students that are PhD students primarily because
they are good at school, and getting a PhD is the most school you can do.
Often times these students have strong transcripts, and so if they know what
to say, they can fairly easily make their way into PhD programs.
Unfortunately, this is arguably the worst reason to get PhD. Classes are only
a small part of a PhD, and are not as important as publishing. You are in a
PhD program to do research. There is no rubric to meet, no test to study for,
and there are no answers in office hours. It is an experience unique from
other types of school, and it will break you if completing more school is the
reward you seek.

A similar, but different class of PhD students are getting a PhD because
everything else seemed boring. This is a alright reason to start a PhD,
especially if you are going directly from an undergraduate program and have
some general research interests. I put myself largely in this camp, with a
little bit of "good at school, ergo do more school" thrown in. If getting a
PhD and doing research sounds better than the other options, that's a fine
reason to get started, but it isn't a great reason to _stay_ in a PhD
program. You're going to need to find some other motivation for sticking
through it if you want to finish.

At the same time, make sure you know what the alternatives are. You don't
need a PhD to get an interesting job in industry, for whatever definition of
"interesting" you want. Consider what you are going to do after you
defend---do you need to have defended to have access the opportunities you
want? There's certainly intrinsic value simply in finishing a PhD, but opportunity cost is also incredibly real, and the process can be isolating, demeaning, and disheartening.

For me, I stuck through it because I was proud of the work we were doing. I
thought we had a positive impact on the security of the Internet as a whole.
I knew I didn't want to stick with the program long enough to have a CV that
would give me a shot at being faculty. I saw the opportunity to spin out
Censys into a company. I knew I wanted the ability to go back into academia,
and the option to go back and teach. So, despite spending the last 1.5 years
primarily working for Censys, it was incredibly important to me to write a
dissertation and defend my PhD.

- Don't go to grad school because you're good at school, and it's more school.
- Don't get a PhD because you think you need one to get a good job.
- Don't get a PhD because your company is paying for it.

I certainly don't want to suggest that this is an exhaustive list of reasons
to go to grad school, but I hope it can provide some context for why people
do put themselves through grad school, or provide some help to people
considering applying to graduate programs. This is also very colored by my
experiences in computer science, your mileage will certainly vary in other
fields. Many PhD programs in computer science have a 30-60% completion rate.
Part of this is because of the allure of high-paying jobs in industry, but
part of this is due to people applying to PhD programs for the wrong reasons,
and wasting a few years of their life. If you end up in this situation,
you're [probably not going to have a good time][gradschoolmentalhealth].

Did you go to grad school for different reasons? Did it work out? [Let me
know on Twitter][davidcadrian].

[censys]: https://censys.io
[davidcadrian]: https://twitter.com/davidcadrian
[gradschoolmentalhealth]: TODO
[jhalderm]: https://jhalderm.com
[psqs]: https://factorable.net
[zakir]: https://zakird.com
