{{{
  "title" : "Developing on a Mac in EECS 281",
  "tags"  : [ "cpp", "c++", "xcode", "homebrew", "brew" ],
  "category" : "reference",
  "date" : "1-13-2014",
  "description" : "Tips for coding EECS 281 projects on Mac",
  "id": 2
}}}

This is a short description of how I like to do C/C++ development for EECS courses at the University of Michigan. I do all of my development locally on my Mac, and then rebuild and do brief testing in the CAEN environment before I submit. 99% of the work I do is done locally.

<!-- more -->

Apple ships a compiler with [Xcode][xcode_home]. This compiler is [C++11][cpp11] compliant (or at least compliant enough), in Mountain Lion and Mavericks only. Therefore, I'm going to assume that you are running Mountain Lion or Mavericks. If you're not, you should upgrade. Mavericks is the newest and is free, Mountian Lion is one version back and costs $20. You might be able to skip Mountain Lion and upgrade directly to Mavericks for free.

The latest version of Xcode is version 5, but version 4 works with C++11 as well. Xcode can be downloaded from the [Mac App Store][xcode_buy] for free. While Xcode does come with a compiler, git, and various other tools such as Make, it doesn't expose these in the terminal unless you install the Xcode Command Line tools. We'll install those when we install [Homebrew][brew_home]. Homebrew is a package manager for command-line utilites on Mac.

### Installing Xcode, brew, and command-line tools

1. Download and install [Xcode][xcode_buy]
2. Install Homebrew by opening a terminal, running the command listed [at the bottom of their site][brew_home], and following the on-screen instructions.
3. In a terminal, run `brew doctor`, and do whatever it says to do in order to install Xcode command-line tools. On Mavericks, this will probably be running `xcode-select install`. On Mountain Lion, this will probably involve opening Xcode and navigating to the downloads tab in the preferences.

At then end of this, you should have a working compiler, command-line tools, and a working Homebrew installation. However, it is possible that you don't have GCC. If you have similar output for `g++ --version`, then GCC is installed fine. Otherwise, you're going to have to manually install GCC using brew.

    $ g++ --version
    Apple LLVM version 5.0 (clang-500.2.79) (based on LLVM 3.3svn)
    Target: x86_64-apple-darwin13.0.0
    Thread model: posix

### Install GCC 4.7 with brew

If you already have GCC, you probably don't need to do this. At any rate, Homebrew maintains various versions of GCC in the *homebrew/versions* repository. To install GCC, you'll have to tap that repository, then install the correct version of gcc. This will take a while, because it will compile GCC from source.

    $ brew tap homebrew/versions
    $ brew update
    $ brew install gcc47
    $ brew link gcc47

Then `g++ --version` should output something similar to:

    $ g++ --version
    g++ (GCC) 4.7.2
    Copyright (C) 2012 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

If you want to see the other versions of GCC availble in the versions repository, including 4.8 and 4.9, run `brew search gcc`.

### Extra Stuff

That's really all you need to do development with, and provides a nice setup if you ever have to link against libraries or install other tools later. I recommend setting up [Premake][premake_home] for each of your projects. Premake can generate Makefiles and Xcode projects and is often much easier to use than dealing with Xcode or Make directly. I'll write up something about Premake later in the week.

Someone else at Michigan wrote up [these notes][xcode_umich] (with pictures!) about using Xcode for EECS courses.


[xcode_home]: https://developer.apple.com/xcode/
[brew_home]: http://brew.sh
[premake_home]: http://industriousone.com/premake
[cpp11]: http://www.stroustrup.com/C++11FAQ.html
[xcode_buy]:https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/xcode/id497799835?mt=12
[xcode_umich]:http://jtdaugh.github.io/xcode-umich/



